README.md, before:

# Flying Fortress IT Blog

This represents the blog content for FFIT, rendered live for your reading at https://blog.flyingfortressit.ca .

This blog is built using Hugo, and all raw blog content source is stored here as part of the deployment pipeline.

## Setup

Clone the repo, then you need to initialize the submodule (theme) with

```
git submodule init
git submodule update
```

You'll also need to get a local install of Hugo. You can follow the installation instructions on the [Hugo GitHub readme](https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo#choose-how-to-install), or you can get it from the Ubuntu/Debian repos (it's called `hugo`).

## Posts

Posts are kept here, and are created with something like:

```hugo new posts/<post-url-name>.md```

 Note that the date in the post file is auto-generated by the above command, and set to the time the time the above command is run. You can change it, see the next section. This will create a file named as you gave in this folder.

### Post front-matter

Posts are formatted with Markdown formatting, except for the front matter which can contain a variety of additional information. A selected example header is included below that contains the most useful parts.

```
---
title: "A sample post"
date: 2017-08-13T14:03:48-05:00
author: Logan Smith
categories:
  - Sample
  - Hugo
  - Markdown
tags:
  - Tutorial
  - Front-matter
---

This is the first part of the article, that'll appear in the summary, as it is above the next line.

<!--more-->

This is below the above line, and won't appear in the summary.
```

Commit message:

Adding descriptions for posts, and noting description in README.

README.md, after:

# Flying Fortress IT Blog

This represents the blog content for FFIT, rendered live for your reading at https://blog.flyingfortressit.ca .

This blog is built using Hugo, and all raw blog content source is stored here as part of the deployment pipeline.

## Setup

Clone the repo, then you need to initialize the submodule (theme) with

```
git submodule init
git submodule update
```

You'll also need to get a local install of Hugo. You can follow the installation instructions on the [Hugo GitHub readme](https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo#choose-how-to-install), or you can get it from the Ubuntu/Debian repos (it's called `hugo`).

## Posts

Posts are kept here, and are created with something like:

```hugo new posts/<post-url-name>.md```

 Note that the date in the post file is auto-generated by the above command, and set to the time the time the above command is run. You can change it, see the next section. This will create a file named as you gave in this folder.

### Post front-matter

Posts are formatted with Markdown formatting, except for the front matter which can contain a variety of additional information. A selected example header is included below that contains the most useful parts.

```
---
title: "A sample post"
date: 2017-08-13T14:03:48-05:00
author: Logan Smith
description: "This is a short description that will be used in header meta tags, including the og:description OpenGraph tag."
categories:
  - Sample
  - Hugo
  - Markdown
tags:
  - Tutorial
  - Front-matter
---

This is the first part of the article, that'll appear in the summary, as it is above the next line.

<!--more-->

This is below the above line, and won't appear in the summary.
```
